---
layout: about
title: SDA Project Motivation
permalink: /about/overview/motivation/
---
Does God act? Whatever one’s initial answer, few people would disagree that the question is important, perhaps among the most important of all questions that we face. Belief in a God who merely starts or sustains the universe, but has no relation to created beings through additional or special divine action (SDA), would be at best an object of refined intellectual curiosity. Prayer and liturgy, among the most defining characteristics of homo sapiens, would largely be devoid of meaning without the expectation of a God who acts, and the story of civilisation is interwoven with belief in special divine action. Besides the stimulation of intellectual life, questions about SDA are also of the greatest personal importance. Taking the longest of long-term perspectives, what, ultimately, do we individuals and as a species have to look forward to apart from death in a slowly dying universe if there is not, ultimately, some kind of special divine action?

Despite its importance, the topic of special divine action has nevertheless been eclipsed since the controversies of the eighteenth century. At this time, a group who became known as ‘deists’ accepted that God exists but denied that there is any divine action beyond that of creation. Although the simple mechanistic universe of the deist imagination has long since been superseded in physics, the idea of a cosmos that is closed to divine action remains extremely influential today across a spectrum of views generally labelled as naturalism or physicalism. In this context, a negative answer to the question, “Does God act?” is often bolstered by a negative answer to the question, “Can God act?”. The final step, in many cases, has been to treat the denial of special divine action as an unexamined assumption. Indeed, even the possibility that belief in special divine action motivates human action, in ways that are irreducible to material causes, is often tacitly ignored, with concomitant distortions of history, literature, theology, religion, and politics.

The Special Divine Action project aims to address these problems, showing that questions surrounding SDA are of the greatest interest, reconnecting the topic of special divine action with academic research initiatives, providing tools for research, and making new teaching resources available. Beyond the immediate theological context, it should be added that the thought experiments and intellectual games involved in thinking about SDA often generate creative ideas even in apparently unrelated disciplines. For example, it may be no accident that the philosophical work in the thirteenth century on the meaning and scope of miracles coincided with important advances in the theory and practice of experimental methods to isolate causes. Today, those of us involved in this project hope that the resources presented here will provide many more people with the opportunity to do research, to learn, and to enjoy the rich interplay of ideas.
