---
layout: about
title: "Perspectives on SDA: Psychologists and Sociologists"
permalink: /about/perspectives/psychologists/
---
**Why is the study of SDA important for me?**
*You are interested in the human mind and the cultures arising from the ways in which the mind grasps truth.*

Psychology (originally ‘the study of the soul’) and sociology can be defined today as the scientific study of the nature, functioning, and development of the human mind and society. The experience or inference of grace, inspiration, miracles, and providence are interwoven with many aspects of human reason, emotion, perception, and communication. From the time of the earliest human artefacts, cities and temples, it is also clear that religious liturgy, organized around God or gods who are capable of interaction with human beings, is one of the most consistent aspects of human society and arguably a mainstay of social cohesion. So psychologists and sociologists ought to be very interested in special divine action.

There is also the potential for fruitful research in many areas of topical interest. One of the most mysterious and important of human cognitive faculties, the faculty of understanding or insight, overlaps with gestalt perception and the eureka effect in psychology, and the experience of illuminative inspiration in special divine action. In addition, the notion of being formed in the life of grace, a life of second-person relatedness to God, has parallels with recent psychological findings regarding the formation of character through second-person relatedness with other human persons. As regards sociology, the British historian and theologian Richard Bauckham has posited the Bible, and specifically the New Testament, as a form of “history from below,” offering a glimpse into the perspective and experience of all layers of society.

Finally, there is the hope that this project will assist in a re-assessment of the basic assumptions underpinning some common practices of psychology and sociology. These disciplines are only slowly shedding their ingrained habits of ‘nothing-buttery’, in which many aspects of human life are held to be reducible to nothing but something that is not their professed subject matter. Such habits have led to religion being distorted by the presumption of underlying natural motives and effects, such as searching for security or promoting social virtues. The special divine action project may therefore serve as a remainder and means of engagement with subtle thinkers of recent centuries who fully accepted modern science, but not the presumption that all causes and motivations have therefore to be restricted to the created order.
